**The acronym**: PHI stands for Protected Health Information - not personal health information (although that’s in essense what it implies), not personally identifiable health information (I’ve seen it used although that would technically be PIHI) and I’m sure there are variants of this that you’ve heard as well.

**The definition**: Here’s the wikipedia definition. Protected health information (PHI) is any information about health status, provision of health care, or payment for health care that can be linked to a specific individual. HHS provides an even simpler definition of PHI - individually identifiable health information transmitted or maintained in any form or medium by a Covered Entity or its Business Associate; the definition of a “business associate” has been extended with the HIPAA Omnibus rule that went into effect in 2013. This term “information” is interpreted rather broadly and includes any part of a patient’s medical record or payment history. The key here is this phrase “that can be linked to a specific individual”. Which is where the other acronym, PII (Personally Identifiable Information) - here’s the link to the wikipedia article on that - becomes relevant. The major difference between PHI and PII is that PII is a legal definition - i.e. PII is anything that could be used to uniquely identify an individual. PHI is a subset of PII in that a medical record could be used to identify a person - especially if the disease or condition is rare enough.

**Protection of PHI**

The core of the HIPAA regulations is to ensure that ownership of any and all medical data is retained solely by the individual. The individual can then decide to parcel out access to others - providers, family members, employers if needed or necessary or simply by preference of the record owner. Only an individual has the right to grant access to their medical data. This was mainly done for the following reasons:

1. Privacy: Obviously we would prefer that our neighbor (or in some cases, family members) not know about whatever condition we might be suffering from or medication we are taking.
2. Bias and discrimination: AIDS, mental health and other conditions have some (albeit declining) social stigma associated with it. The HIPAA PHI provisions ensure that employers and others do not have access to one’s medical record and use the information contained within to discriminate against the individual based on their health information.