# Cloud Deployment Models

In addition to service models, which basically define the level of control customers have over infrastructure, there are also **Deployment Models**, listed below, which define the group to which cloud computing resources are shared.

1. **Private cloud.** Most often confused with virtualization, private cloud infrastructure is used exclusively by one entity, and can be on or off premise. This is the direction most larger enterprises will move to, including within healthcare. Catalyze maintains a compliant private cloud. The challenge with most current private cloud deployments is that they provide none of the capabilities that a public cloud (see below) provides such as auto-scaling, API based access to perform a host of tasks etc.

2. **Community cloud.** In this deployment, infrastructure is shared with a group, or community, of users. We think of this as a shared private cloud, and it’s usually a community that has something in common. With Catalyze, we have a HIPAA compliant private cloud in which we host our community of customers; the commonality in our community is that our customers are concerned about compliance, so we’ve painstakingly created a compliant environment with multiple private private networks. Customers get their own private networks within the Catalyze cloud.

3. **Public cloud.** This is the infrastructure that developers know best. In this deployment, the infrastructure is for public use. Pretty simple.

4. **Hybrid cloud.** This is where things get interesting. In this deployment, there is a mix of two different models from above. Hopefully using Catalyze will provide a good example use case. We have a private cloud - Catalyze manages and maintains the cloud computing resources and it’s exclusive to us. For our customers, we set up private networks within our private cloud, so our private cloud is actually a community cloud for our customers. Additionally, we’re beginning to explore using public cloud resources for certain, non-compliant things such as code sets. In non-compliant deployments, if more resources are needed, such as the case with spikes in usage and/traffic, private clouds will burst into public clouds to gain access to additional cloud computing resources. Key here is to ensure that "post burst", the additional capacity that was spun up, needs to be powered down else month end bills could be a bit surprising.
